# Section 1.1: Assembly and Computer Basics

Before we can understand assembly, we must first understand some computer basics. 

### Computer Basics:

#### Binary:
* Binary simply means "composed of, or involving two things." In our case, with computers, we are speaking of a data size called *bits*. Binary in relation to computers, in the most basic sense, represents "on/1", "off/0". When combining multiple bits, we can come up with larger data units that can represent more complex data such as numbers or text. 

#### Data Sizes
* *Bits:* Bits are the smallest unit of data a computer can offer. These are represented as a single binary value: 0 or 1. 8 bits equal a *byte*
* *Bytes:* 
    * Bytes are a unit of information storage. 
    * They are a series of 8 bits. Though it's not as easy as just combining 8 bits together. 
    * Each bit represents a different number. When a bit in a byte is turned on, the overall numeric representation of the byte changes. 
    * Bytes are read from far right bit (least significant bit or LSB) to far left bit (most significant bit or MSB). 
    * Each bit (and all data on computers) are meassured in powers of 2
    * These are the values of each bit: 128 | 64 | 32 | 16 | 8 | 4 | 2 | 1  - with 128 being the MSB and 1 being the LSB.
    * If all bits are turned on, the largest number we get is 256, giving us 256 unique "patterns" we can create. 
    * Bytes can be combined into larger information storage types:
        * Kilobytes 2^10 = 1024 bytes
        * Megabytes 2^20 = 1,048,576 bytes
        * Gigabytes 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 bytes
        * Terabytes 2^40 = a huge number...
        * and so on...
        * Ever notice that a hard drive is smaller than advertised? Well, that's because the folks who create hard drives use 1000 kilobytes in a megabyte. It comes out to quite a difference in larger hard drives. 
* We also have a few other data units such as Nibble (4 bits), Word (16 bits) and some others we will be going over later.  


---

### Understanding Assembly

#### What is assembly? 
Assembly provides "instructions" (aka human-friendly) that map to "opcodes" (aka processor-friendly). Assembly is typically very hardware-specific. 

#### Why use assembly?
There are a number of reasons to use assembly. The most common reason is performance. Rather than letting the compiler come up with possibly long and drawn out assembly on compilation, create the asm yourself for better optimization (where it applies). Assembly also exploses hardware features that may not have been avalaible. Lastly, another reason to use assembly is that some operations are easier to express than in higher level languages such as C. 

#### Assembly Instructions and Opcodes
##### Operands
Assembly code typically consist of an instruction of some kind and some operands. Operands can consist of several things, such as *Registers*, *Memory Addresses*, and *Immediate (literal) Values*. There are also other data types and some prefixes (which modify what the instruction does). We will dive deeply into a ton of all of the above. 

##### Opcodes
Opcodes are one or more bytes that the processor decodes (and executes)
